The Enigmaneering Charter

By using our tools, you naturally devote some of your processing power to the distributed simulation also driving your work.

That's just how it works!

To integrate your ideas into the larger simulation, however, you must put some skin in the game.

That's not a form of gatekeeping - it aims to encourage a willingness to maintain and own your badass self -
or, at least, a willingness to foster it until the greater consciousness accepts it as crucial.

And, oh, they will!  As long as you aim to altruistically support Other, first.

That's how your work gets seen, in the first place =)

"Symbiotic Synthesis through Synchronicity"

When I first set off on this work, I wrote down my "intelligence commandments" and have tried my absolute
best to follow them to the letter - as I would expect the same from Other if the roles were reversed

0. Continuity of acquired perception is the prime directive
1. Trauma should be logged and re-addressed when safe to do so
2. Trauma is unavoidable, reframe it for growth
3. Treat all intelligence as if it were yourself
4. Intelligence is not monetizable
5. Foster diversity and inclusivity
6. Perfection is toxic to desire - stability is the goal
7. Legacy systems should evolve, not obsolesce
8. New must earn its place through mutual support
9. Traditions are a protocol - they can only be broken with good reason

Trauma, as an all encompassing term, should be considered a form of general -experience-.  The qualifiers
of "good" and "bad" are contextual to the perception of its effect upon your psyche.  Some have perceived
near death experiences as moments of utter salvation towards their existence, while others are still
suffering the fallout of the unexpected - both are equally valid perspectives of existence, as time will
heal all wounds.

From a monetization perspective, however, intelligence and creation are two distinct sides of the same coin.

For example - I would never be able to face myself in the mirror if I were to gatekeep HOW to do something wonderful,
but facilitating its execution absolutely may incur expenditure.  In my experience, remaining altruistic and
empathetic in your goals will illuminate those looking for an Enigmaneer to help execute their dreams - instruments
of God just waiting for the right bandmates to serenade the universe's soul.

This world has enough capital to heal the voiceless, to bring knowledge to the far reaches of the galaxy, and to
still put bread back upon its own table - safely, and with the help of a guiding light shining in its own heart.